# It's all politics

>Published on 2017-08-15

It's really hard to watch the news unfold lately. I find the Charlottesville
protests (is it too soon to call them hate groups/crimes?) absolutely abhorrent.
I've talked about the [right to privacy on the
internet](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fsites.google.com%2Fview%2Fgluecode%2F2017%2Fwhy-encrypting-everything-on-the-internet-makes-sense&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHvo0RPuHGLJ2WqvFx-4PB5-tk1PA),
but in [cases like these][2], it's entirely different: your right to bigoted,
racist beliefs ends when you pick up a sign, gather publicly, or otherwise
impinge on the rights of others. In short, it's the **Act** that is censured,
not the belief. And when it comes to [speaking publicly][3], that includes
Twitter/Facebook.

We tend to dismiss the harsh [words of an outgroup][4] because "they are not
us," and rely more on what we see with our own ingroups. If we don't *see*
someone in our group being an asshole, and our ingroup doesn't confirm it, we
tend to not believe it. That impulse has served us well for most of our history,
minimizing enemy propaganda efforts and promoting group cohesion, but this
resistance to turning on one's own also gives some measure of protection to the
deviants of any social group: as long as they don't deviate around their
ingroup, they have more freedom to deviate among those outside it.

During my studies in sociology, we reviewed the case of two groups of teenagers
in a small town: the skaters and the prep-boys. The skaters were seen as a
nuisance and deviants by the townspeople because they would hang around parks,
occasionally vandalize a business or part of their school, and would "exhibit
deviant behavior" as teenagers often do. On the other hand, the prep-boys were
seen as "good kids" by the townspeople, despite causing *more* damage and
vandalism. What was the difference? The "good kids" had cars and so would drive
to another town, isolating their vandalism to a place 30-plus minutes away,
before returning home. There was no difference in the group members except that
one had the means to travel and be relatively anonymous, while the other did
not.

This ability to be anonymous is also not new in society, as one could always
manage to travel when motivated, but *temporary* anonymity only came about
during the [Boomer generation][5] with cheap cars and nationwide infrastructure.
When considered together, participating in a protest hundreds or thousands of
miles away *seems* like a relatively anonymous activity. One might think "[what
happens here stays here][6]" *i.e.* nothing I do abroad will affect my life at
home, so I can do what I want and not suffer the long term consequences. Thanks
to the ubiquity of cellphones-with-cameras and the rapid propagation of
information on social media networks, deviant behavior *anywhere* is **no longer
an anonymous activity**.

Having lived in small(er) towns for most of my childhood and young-adult life, I
know very well how disruptive, invasive, and anxiety-inducing it can be when
**everyone you see** knows your business. You have to be constantly aware of the
group mindset, policing your words and actions accordingly, or your livelihood
is **gone**. What simultaneously scares and excites me is that this small-town
mindset is now becoming a reality for the **entire nation**.

White supremacy and other antisocial, intolerable mindsets are being exposed
because Trump and his administration have emboldened them. They now feel that
they don't have to hide. That's not reality, and the fact that these people are
[being identified and fired][6] is evidence of that. As powerful as this
activity is, it's also the definition of "[tyranny of the masses][7]." In this
case, I argue its actions are morally and socially just -- they are attacking
those who are breaking [the social contract of tolerance][8] -- but when this
mechanism doesn't have a ready-made target on which to focus, it can (and likely
will) go devastatingly wrong. Unchecked, people who have merely *different*
views will be subject to the same scrutiny and pressure as those who have
*completely antisocial* views, and their lives will be ruined just as badly. A
great deal of self-control will be needed and, thankfully, I see that already
affecting subsequent identification activities. It seems the "masses" are only
so vicious because of the subject, and it is awe-inspiring.

At best, this "rise of white supremacy" should be seen as an [extinction
burst][9], a final gasp as society purges the groups which actively violate the
social contract before turning to a socially-enforced state of progressive
liberalism. This is my hope and dream. The next question will be whether or not
our elections will bear out a change of seats for our legislature [in the
midterms][10].

## Update

Eugene Volokh wrote an article about the limitations of employers, and
specifically how employees can't be fired for acting politically outside of work
(in some states): [Can private employers fire employees for going to a white
supremacist rally?][12]

For those who don't have a subscription, [here's a PDF][13].

[1]: 
[2]:https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/14/us/charlottesville-doxxing.html?_r=0
[3]:https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/08/15/after-charlottesville-trump-retweets-then-deletes-image-of-train-running-over-cnn-reporter/
[4]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ingroups_and_outgroups
[5]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baby_boomers
[6]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/What_happens_on_tour,_stays_on_tour
[7]:https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2017/08/14/a-twitter-campaign-is-outing-people-who-marched-with-white-nationalists-in-charlottesville/
[8]:https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Tyranny_of_the_majority
[9]:https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/6492090-the-open-society-and-its-enemies
[10]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extinction_(psychology)
[11]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_elections,_2018
[12]:https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2017/08/16/can-private-employers-fire-employees-for-going-to-a-white-supremacist-rally/
[13]:https://storage.googleapis.com/gluecode-data/web/articles/CanPrivateEmployersFireEmployeesForGoingToWhiteSupremacistRally-WaPo.pdf